---
layout: default
nav_order: 5
title: CENSO
has_children: true
permalink: page/censo
toc: false
---
# {{page.title}}
{: .no_toc}

The Commandline ENergetic SOrting of Conformer Rotamer Ensembles (CENSO) software allows DFT/WFT refinement of conformer ensembles. It is built modularly and contains the following parts:

1. **Prescreening**: A cheap DFT method is used to discard energetically high conformers. Solvation can optionally be included via ALPB/GBSA. No thermodynamic corrections are applied.
2. **Screening**: The ensemble is sorted using a more expensive method, including SMD/COSMO-RS solvation contributions. Optionally, thermodynamic corrections are applied with SPH.
3. **(Geometry-)Optimization**: Reoptimization of the ensemble structures, including a new sorting.
4. **Refinement**: High-level single-point energies for precise sorting.

Additionally, NMR and UV/Vis spectra can be computed for the final ensemble.

{% include note.html content='CENSO requires access to DFT/WFT methods. Therefore, **ORCA** or **Turbomole** are required in addition to **xtb**.' %}

The original published CENSO v1 comes as a Python program and is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/grimme-lab/CENSO/releases/tag/v.1.2.0).
CENSO v2 also includes a Python interface also available via [GitHub](https://github.com/grimme-lab/CENSO/releases/tag/v2.1.2).
Both CENSO programs are controlled via an input file, usually called `censorc`. A CENSO computation can be invoked with:

```bash
censo -inp <input ensemble> -inprc <input file>
```

{% include warning.html content='If no input file is provided when calling the program, CENSO will try to use the `.censorc` file in your home directory.' %}

A default input file can be generated by calling `censo --newconfig`. 
This file is also used to define the paths to the required QM programs.
A detailed list of settings can be found in the [documentation](https://xtb-docs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/CENSO_docs/censorc.html).

## Literature
- **CENSO ||** Grimme, Stefan, Fabian Bohle, Andreas Hansen, Philipp Pracht, Sebastian Spicher, and Marcel Stahn. "Efficient quantum chemical calculation of structure ensembles and free energies for nonrigid molecules." 
[*The Journal of Physical Chemistry A 125*, **2021**, *19*, 4039-4054.](https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpca.1c00971)
{: .fs-6 .fw-300 }

